## Music Perception & Notation

Humans process musical information through a complex interplay of perceptual and cognitive processes. A sound wave transmits a pattern of oscillations, created by an excitation force (e.g., bowing) that stimulates a vibrating object (e.g., a viola’s string), through a physical medium such as air [CSS19]. On the way from the source (e.g., bowed viola string) to our ears, the sound waves carry information about the vibrating object, the driving force, and possibly other interactions through the physical medium (e.g., the walls of a room). When the waves reach the ears, these oscillations are translated into a pattern of neural pulses that the brain processes to make sense of musical elements such as melody, harmony, rhythm, and timbre. The ear acts like a set of overlapping bandpass frequency filters [Lyo17]. Sound energy within a frequency range is integrated across frequency and time (the temporal pattern of neural pulses can also encode frequency). The notion of the critical band (the range of frequencies that are integrated) is important psychoacoustically because it provides a basis for explanations of the degree of masking and loudness summation, but also of frequency discrimination.

Pitch may be defined as the human perceptual correlate of acoustic frequency. Specifically, the perceptual representation of pitch involves at least two dimensions: a circular dimension of pitch chroma (the pitch class, sometimes called tonality) and a vertical dimension of pitch height [She82]. A pitch class is a set of all heights of pitches that are perceived as repeating once per octave (e.g., all C notes). Both pitch chroma and pitch height dimensions generally allow ordering pitches on a scale from low to high, but not always unambiguously (e.g., Shepard tones [She64]). Furthermore, the relationship between pitch and frequency is not linear: we can better detect differences in lower frequencies than higher frequencies [SVN37]. For example, we can tell the difference between 500 and 1500 Hz, but probably struggle to discriminate between 9 and 10 kHz, although the frequency distance remains the same. This is because the width of the critical band increases at higher frequencies (frequencies are smeared) and decreases at lower frequencies (frequencies can be resolved).

Musically, chroma is the most important part of the pitch and forms the basis of melody (distinct pitches played in sequence) and harmony (distinct pitches coinciding with one another), but also of rhythm. Rhythm is what orders the movement of melodic and harmonic patterns in time, both in the sense of how listeners perceive and how musicians perform music, consisting of beats (perceived pulses that mark equally spaced points in time), tempo (their frequency), and meter (perceived cyclical groupings of beats into units marked by accents; the time signature). Staff notation is a symbolic visual representation of music that allows musicians to read the pitch and rhythm of notes they are supposed to play, and forms the basis of digital systems to encode musical documents in a machine-readable format. The pitch (class) and octave (height) of a note are indicated by the vertical position of the note within, below, or above the staff. Notes have different durations or note lengths, represented by whole notes, half notes, quarter notes, eighth notes etc. Each note length has a specific duration relative to the beat defined by the meter. Roughly speaking, rhythms and melodies are made up of notes with different durations.

Timbre, or tone colour, is a “catch-all” term, as it has been called, that refers to everything on what a sound or musical piece “sounds like,” except for pitch information, loudness, and rhythm-related features, although changes in pitch, dynamics, and timing also produce changes in timbre [SSM+19]. Timbre is primarily determined by the relative amplitudes of frequency components. Phase can also play a role, especially when certain changes in the relative phases of harmonics within a critical band can change the resulting envelope modulation [Lyo17]. Temporal characteristics of the signal (e.g., attack time, decay) and vibrato, are key contributors to timbre too [APS05]. However, changes in harmonic amplitudes affect timbre in a much more direct way, such that timbral (i.e., perceptual) distances between sounds correlate well with spectral differences, such as measured in terms of the log power outputs of a one-third-octave filterbank [Plo76]. Such an approach to timbre is not accurate or complete [Lyo17], but captures a reasonable part of the way a sound or musical piece “sounds” and, together with non-linear frequency scales, is the basis for computer representations of musical spectra.
